Add Q-less tutorial (#105)
JuliaSmoothOptimizers/QRMumps.jl: docs/src/tutorials/qless.md

#
# This procedure is backward stable if we perform one step of iterative refinement---see
#
# Å. Björck, Stability analysis of the method of seminormal equations for linear least squares problems,
# Linear Algebra and its Applications, 88–89, pp. 31-48, 1987, DOI 10.1016/0024-3795(87)90101-7.

using LinearAlgebra, Printf, SparseArrays 
using QRMumps

# Initialize data
m, n = 7, 5
irn = [1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 7]
jcn = [1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 4, 5, 2, 1, 3]
val = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 1.0, 3.0, 1.0, 3.0, 2.0, 1.0]

A = sparse(irn, jcn, val, m, n)
b = [22.0, 2.0, 13.0, 8.0, 17.0, 6.0, 5.0]
x_star = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0]

# Initialize QRMumps
qrm_init()

# Initialize data structures
spmat = qrm_spmat_init(A)
spfct = qrm_spfct_init(spmat)

# Specify that we want the Q-less QR factorization
qrm_set(spfct, "qrm_keeph", 0)

# Perform symbolic analysis of A and factorize A = QR
qrm_analyse!(spmat, spfct)
qrm_factorize!(spmat, spfct)

# Compute the RHS of the semi-normal equations
z = A'*b

# Solve RᵀR x = z = Aᵀb in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀx₁ = z  
x₁ = qrm_solve(spfct, z; transp = 't')

# 2. Solve Rx = x₁

> x = qrm_solve(spfct, x₁; transp = 'n')

Reviewer: Here, you don't use the in-place solve functions, but for the least-norm problem, you do. Let's be consistent. Also, isn't there an in-place solve that overwrites the rhs? Something like `qrm_solve!(spfct, b)`?

Author: Ok.
Concerning the in-place solve I think that you are confusing with `qrm_apply!(spfct, b)` that does overwrite `b`. To my knowledge, there is no such function in QRMumps but it should definitely be implemented.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

error_norm = norm(x - x_star)

> residual_norm = norm(A*x - b)

Reviewer: Is this a zero-residual problem?

I think it would make more sense to compute $$\Vert A' (Ax - b) \Vert$$.

Author: Yes it is. 

Ok, I can add this, is $$‖A^T(Ax - b)‖$$ also called a residual norm ?

Reviewer 2: It's the residual norm of the normal equation `A'Ax = A'b` but we generally denote `r` as the residual of the original problem (`b - Ax`) and `A'r` the residual of the normal equation.

Author: Maybe I can rename `residual_norm` as `normal_residual_norm` if I compute $$‖A^T(Ax - b)‖$$ ?

Reviewer 2: `Aresidual_norm` seems more relevant.

@printf("Error norm ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)
@printf("Residual norm ‖Ax - b‖= %10.5e\n", residual_norm)

# As such, this method is not backward stable and we need to add an iterative refinement step:                                                          

> # For this, we compute the least-square solution Δx of min ‖r - AΔx‖, where r is the residual r = Aᵀb - AᵀA*x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For this, we compute the least-squares solution Δx of min ‖r - AΔx‖, where r is the residual r = Aᵀb - AᵀA*x.
```

I think $$r = b - Ax$$.

> ```@example qless1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```@example qless1
# The Q-less QR factorization may be used to solve the least-norm problem
#
#   minimize ‖x‖  subject to  Ax=b
#
# while saving storage because Q is not formed.
# Thus it is appropriate for large problems where storage is at a premium.
# The normal equations of the second kind AAᵀy = b are the optimality conditions of the least-norm problems, where x = Aᵀy.
# If Aᵀ = QR, they can be equivalently written RᵀRy = b.
#
# This procedure is backward stable if we perform one step of iterative refinement---see
#
# Å. Björck, Stability analysis of the method of seminormal equations for linear least squares problems,
# Linear Algebra and its Applications, 88–89, pp. 31-48, 1987, DOI 10.1016/0024-3795(87)90101-7.

```

> using QRMumps, LinearAlgebra, SparseArrays, Printf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using LinearAlgebra, Printf, SparseArrays
using QRMumps
```

# Initialize data
m, n = 5, 7
irn = [1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 4, 5, 2, 1, 3]
jcn = [1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 7]
val = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 1.0, 5.0, 1.0, 3.0, 6.0, 1.0]

A = sparse(irn, jcn, val, m, n)
b = [40.0, 10.0, 44.0, 98.0, 87.0]
y_star = [16.0, 1.0, 10.0, 3.0, 19.0, 3.0, 2.0]
y₁ = zeros(n)
y₂ = zeros(m)
y₃ = zeros(n)

Δy₁ = zeros(n)
Δy₂ = zeros(m)
Δy₃ = zeros(n)
r = zeros(m)

# Initialize QRMumps
qrm_init()

# Initialize data structures
spmat = qrm_spmat_init(A)
spfct = qrm_spfct_init(spmat)

> # Specify not storing Q for the QR factorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Specify that we want the Q-less QR factorization
```

qrm_set(spfct, "qrm_keeph", 0)

# Perform symbolic analysis of Aᵀ and factorize Aᵀ = QR
qrm_analyse!(spmat, spfct; transp='t')
qrm_factorize!(spmat, spfct, transp='t')

> # Solve Rᵀy₁ =  b  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Solve RᵀR y = b in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀy₁ =  b  
```

qrm_solve!(spfct, b, y₁; transp='t')

> # Solve Ry₂ = y₁

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# 2. Solve Ry = y₁
```

> qrm_solve!(spfct, y₁, y₂; transp='n')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
qrm_solve!(spfct, y₁, y; transp='n')
```

> # Overall, RᵀRy₂ = b. Equivalently, RᵀQᵀQRy₂ = b or AAᵀy₂ = b

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> # Compute least norm solution of min ‖b - Ay‖

Reviewer: I’m confused. This step doesn’t belong in the solution of the least-norm problem.

Author: See this comment. I am not sure if this answers your question ?

> Thanks @MaxenceGollier ! I believe there is a mistake in the first example: `y_star` and `y\_2` have to be of size n(=7) instead of m(=5). In fact you cannot compute `norm(A*y\_2-b)` because of incompatible dimensions. The actual least-norm solution is `y\_3=A'*y\_2`. Have I missed something?

A = sparse(irn, jcn, val, m, n)
b = [40.0, 10.0, 44.0, 98.0, 87.0]
x_star = [16.0, 1.0, 10.0, 3.0, 19.0, 3.0, 2.0]
y₁ = zeros(n)
y = zeros(m)
x = zeros(n)

# Initialize QRMumps
qrm_init()

# Initialize data structures
spmat = qrm_spmat_init(A)
spfct = qrm_spfct_init(spmat)

# Specify that we want the Q-less QR factorization
qrm_set(spfct, "qrm_keeph", 0)

# Perform symbolic analysis of Aᵀ and factorize Aᵀ = QR
qrm_analyse!(spmat, spfct; transp='t')
qrm_factorize!(spmat, spfct, transp='t')

# Solve RᵀR y = b in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀy₁ = b  
qrm_solve!(spfct, b, y₁; transp='t')

# 2. Solve Ry = y₁
qrm_solve!(spfct, y₁, y; transp='n')

# Compute the least norm solution of Ax = b
x .= A'*y

# Compute error norm and residual norm
error_norm = norm(x - x_star)
residual_norm = norm(b - A*x)

@printf("Error norm ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)
@printf("Residual norm ‖b - Ax‖ = %10.5e\n", residual_norm)
```

```@example qless2
# The Q-less QR factorization may be used to solve the least-square problem
#
#   minimize ‖Ax - b‖
#
# while saving storage because Q is not formed.
# Thus it is appropriate for large problems where storage is at a premium.

> # The normal equations AᵀAx = Aᵀb are the optimality conditions of the least squares problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The normal equations AᵀAx = Aᵀb are the optimality conditions of the least-squares problem.
```

qrm_analyse!(spmat, spfct)
qrm_factorize!(spmat, spfct)

# Compute the RHS of the semi-normal equations
mul!(z, A', b)

# Solve RᵀR x = z = Aᵀb in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀx₁ = z  
qrm_solve!(spfct, z, x₁; transp = 't')

# 2. Solve Rx = x₁
qrm_solve!(spfct, x₁, x; transp = 'n')

error_norm = norm(x - x_star)
Aresidual_norm = norm(A'*(A*x - b))

@printf("Error norm ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)
@printf("Normal equations residual norm ‖Aᵀ(Ax - b)‖= %10.5e\n", Aresidual_norm)

# As such, this method is not backward stable and we need to add an iterative refinement step:                                                          
# For this, we compute the least-squares solution Δx of min ‖r - AΔx‖, where r is the residual r = Aᵀb - AᵀA*x.
# We then update x := x + Δx

# Compute the residual in two steps to prevent allocating memory:
# 1. Compute y = b - Ax
mul!(y, A, x)
@. y = b - y

# 2. Compute r = Aᵀy = Aᵀ(b - A*x)
mul!(r, A', y)

# Solve the semi-normal equations as before
qrm_solve!(spfct, r, Δx₁; transp='t')
qrm_solve!(spfct, Δx₁, Δx; transp='n')

# Update the least squares solution
@. x = x + Δx

error_norm = norm(x - x_star)

> Aresidual_norm = norm(A'*(A*x - b))

Reviewer: Either make everything "non-allocating" or make everything allocating, but not both.

```@example qless1
# The Q-less QR factorization may be used to solve the least-norm problem
#
#   minimize ‖x‖  subject to  Ax=b
#
# while saving storage because Q is not formed.
# Thus it is appropriate for large problems where storage is at a premium.
# The normal equations of the second kind AAᵀy = b are the optimality conditions of the least-norm problems, where x = Aᵀy.
# If Aᵀ = QR, they can be equivalently written RᵀRy = b.
#
# This procedure is backward stable if we perform one step of iterative refinement---see
#
# Å. Björck, Stability analysis of the method of seminormal equations for linear least squares problems,

> # Linear Algebra and its Applications, 88–89, pp. 31-48, 1987, DOI 10.1016/0024-3795(87)90101-7.

Reviewer: Sorry, this needs to be adjusted. The method of seminormal equations for the least-norm problem is analyzed in by Paige in https://www.ams.org/journals/mcom/1973-27-122/S0025-5718-1973-0331745-1.

For normal equations, the stability with and without Q is similar.

But it's not the same for least squares. It's only for least squares that we need iterative refinement. I think it would be useful to write functions that solve those problems and hide the details.

Author: I will add iterative refinement in a separate PR.

Reviewer: I'm saying the text needs to be adjusted too.

using LinearAlgebra, Printf, SparseArrays
using QRMumps

# Initialize data
m, n = 5, 7
irn = [1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 4, 5, 2, 1, 3]
jcn = [1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 7]
val = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 1.0, 5.0, 1.0, 3.0, 6.0, 1.0]

A = sparse(irn, jcn, val, m, n)
b = [40.0, 10.0, 44.0, 98.0, 87.0]
x_star = [16.0, 1.0, 10.0, 3.0, 19.0, 3.0, 2.0]
y₁ = zeros(n)
y = zeros(m)
x = zeros(n)

e = zeros(n)
r = zeros(m)

# Initialize QRMumps
qrm_init()

# Initialize data structures
spmat = qrm_spmat_init(A)
spfct = qrm_spfct_init(spmat)

# Specify that we want the Q-less QR factorization
qrm_set(spfct, "qrm_keeph", 0)

# Perform symbolic analysis of Aᵀ and factorize Aᵀ = QR
qrm_analyse!(spmat, spfct; transp='t')
qrm_factorize!(spmat, spfct, transp='t')

# Solve RᵀR y = b in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀy₁ = b  
qrm_solve!(spfct, b, y₁; transp='t')

# 2. Solve Ry = y₁
qrm_solve!(spfct, y₁, y; transp='n')

# Compute the least norm solution of Ax = b
x .= A'*y

# Compute error norm and residual norm
@. e = x - x_star
error_norm = norm(e)

mul!(r, A, x)
@. r = b - r
residual_norm = norm(r)

@printf("Error norm ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)

> @printf("Residual norm ‖b - Ax‖ = %10.5e\n", residual_norm)

Reviewer: `%7.1e` is sufficient for positive quantities.

> # Alternatively, you can use `qrm_min_norm_semi_normal!` which performs these steps automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Alternatively, you can use `qrm_min_norm_semi_normal!`, which performs these steps automatically
```

mul!(z, A', b)

# Solve RᵀR x = z = Aᵀb in two steps:
# 1. Solve Rᵀx₁ = z  
qrm_solve!(spfct, z, x₁; transp = 't')

# 2. Solve Rx = x₁
qrm_solve!(spfct, x₁, x; transp = 'n')

# Compute errors
@. e = x - x_star
error_norm = norm(e)

# Compute the normal equations residual in two steps to prevent allocating memory:
# 1. Compute r = b - Ax
mul!(r, A, x)
@. r = b - r

# 2. Compute Aᵀr = Aᵀ(b - A*x)
mul!(Ar, A', r)
Aresidual_norm = norm(Ar)

@printf("Error norm ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)
@printf("Normal equations residual norm ‖Aᵀ(Ax - b)‖= %10.5e\n", Aresidual_norm)

# As such, this method is not backward stable and we need to add an iterative refinement step:                                                          
# For this, we compute the least-squares solution Δx of min ‖Aᵀr - AΔx‖, where r is the residual r = b - A*x.
# We then update x := x + Δx

# Solve the semi-normal equations as before
qrm_solve!(spfct, Ar, Δx₁; transp='t')
qrm_solve!(spfct, Δx₁, Δx; transp='n')

# Update the least squares solution
@. x = x + Δx

# Compute errors as before
@. e = x - x_star
error_norm = norm(e)

mul!(r, A, x)
@. r = b - r
mul!(Ar, A', r)
Aresidual_norm = norm(Ar)

> @printf("Error norm (iterative refinement step) ‖x* - x‖ = %10.5e\n", error_norm)
> @printf("Normal equations residual norm (iterative refinement step) ‖Aᵀ(Ax - b)‖= %10.5e\n", Aresidual_norm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@printf("Error norm (iterative refinement step) ‖x* - x‖ = %7.1e\n", error_norm)
@printf("Normal equations residual norm (iterative refinement step) ‖Aᵀ(Ax - b)‖= %7.1e\n", Aresidual_norm)
```

> # Alternatively, you can use `qrm_least_squares_semi_normal!` which performs these steps automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Alternatively, you can use `qrm_least_squares_semi_normal!`, which performs these steps automatically
```

```@example qless1
using QRMumps, LinearAlgebra, SparseArrays, Printf

> irn = [1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 4, 5, 2, 1, 3]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
m, n = 5, 7
irn = [1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 4, 5, 2, 1, 3]
```

Then use `m` and `n` below.

jcn = [1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 7]
val = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 1.0, 5.0, 1.0, 3.0, 6.0, 1.0]

A = sparse(irn, jcn, val, 5, 7)
b = [40.0, 10.0, 44.0, 98.0, 87.0]
y_star = [0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0]
y₁ = similar(b,7)
y₂ = similar(b)

qrm_init()

> spmat = qrm_spmat_init(A)

Reviewer: Please add a comment next to each QRMumps call to explain what it does:

- initialize data structure
- perform symbolic analysis
- etc.

That is very useful when a user only looks at an example.

Author: I did like in other files of this folder I can adapt this but they should be changed too then

Reviewer: I understand. We can change the other examples separetely.

Reviewer: @MaxenceGollier ⬆️

# For this, we compute the least-squares solution Δx of min ‖r - AΔx‖, where r is the residual r = Aᵀb - AᵀA*x.
# We then update x := x + Δx

# Compute the residual in two steps to prevent allocating memory:
# 1. Compute y = b - Ax
mul!(y, A, x)

> @. y = b - y

Reviewer: Call this r

# 2. Compute r = Aᵀy = Aᵀ(b - A*x)

> mul!(r, A', y)

Reviewer: Call this Ar
